Now talking to President Bulger.
Congratulations, sir, on your book.
Oh, thank you.
You know, my specialty is books and authors, and I've done close to about a thousand interviews over the years.
And one of the things I've been told is that one of the no-nos in publishing is to have a green dust jacket.
But, of course, in your case, I think it's perfectly appropriate with the pub date being March 17th.
Sure.
I think it's also appropriate that today is a primary day in Massachusetts.
It is.
You want to talk a little bit about, if you don't mind, we'll just talk generally.
Any thoughts about the day as the polls go into their second or third hour of being opened?
Well, I think it's a very light day today.
a bit heavy with the weather.
Have you voted already?
Yes, I have.
It's just as hard as a Democrat to vote today, isn't it?
There's not much beyond it, but locally there's a contest.
My own son is on the ballot.
Oh, really?
For the state committee.
And then on March the 26th, he'll be on the ballot again, seeking to succeed me.
Oh.
Special election.
well congratulations it was his choice to do it and that's that's wonderful i love the early line in the book that uh you you decided that well this politics might even be more more fun than baseball yeah talk a little bit about that and and i also understand at some point you know i'd like to just maybe compare
Massachusetts politics, and maybe even specifically South Boston politics, say, to the way it's played in Texas, or Austin, Texas, where I run, or, you know, I'm in Tallahassee.
If you could just distinguish, and maybe this would be an entry point for our discussion here, what is it about South Boston politics that makes it unique?
Well, politics is a...
It's a very important part of the life of South Boston.
People get into it deeply.
They always have.
There's a long tradition of political leaders from Speaker John W. McCormick, who, as you know, was a son of South Boston, and the dean of the governor's council was Patrick J. Sonny McDonough.
The president of the Boston City Council right now is Jim Kelly from South Boston.
And Joe Moakley, the congressman from South Boston, held a position of great prominence on the Rules Committee until the Democrats were driven out in the last election.
So it's part of the atmosphere there.
We can't get in with our...
first gulps of the salt air.
I don't know whether the piece was in the New York Times or the Globe Sunday, but it was really an interesting piece on just how hateful politics has become.
In the old days, at least, I think you respected your opponents.
Right.
And did you feel some of that when you decided to leave and
Yeah, well, I think it had changed a great deal.
One of the problems, I think, is that it's been depersonalized.
That is to say, we have all the consultants, we have the spin doctors, we have the pollsters, and people obey their dictates.
And could I just shut the door here for a minute?
Sure.
People here are doing my work.
I appreciate it, but I get distracted by it.
No, I think one of the things that I didn't like was that good people would become candidates.
They'd abandon all sense of right and wrong because, after all, this is the advice of the consultant to whom you pay a great deal of money.
And whatever he says goes.
If he says that this particular person is wounded, his blood is in the water, he's an unpopular figure, go after him.
Even if he has nothing to do with your particular campaign.
If someone provides that kind of advice and you're paying for it, you follow it.
And what if someone were to say, but that would be very damaging?
In general or to the individual?
And a bit unfair since it may turn out that the individual has been treated badly by others, and that's the only reason for this current unpopularity.
It would make no difference.
People just plow ahead.
And I think when it was more personal,
when they knew each other, oh, I think they could really take each other's heads off, there's no question.
There would be good, hard battles.
But because I think they were going to look at each other again thereafter, and because they weren't goaded on by this high finance consultant habit, there were limits.
It was just as hard fought.
But there were real limits, I think, on people.
Self-imposed limits.
And some of the things that... Well, I saw a good politician in Massachusetts only a year or two ago running.
And his opponent had no money.
He had lots of money.
And his consultant said, here, let us ridicule this fellow to death.
The guy without money.
Yeah.
Ridicule the fellow without the money.
And there was much fun in it.
I must say that it was clever, and it must have been so debilitating to the individual.
I'm sure at some point he must have said, why did I ever run?
I'm going to be so badly damaged by this run.
Was this a statewide contest?
Yeah.
And, I mean, so this, have you noticed this kind of thing just coming on more recently with the influence of the polls and the consultants and all that stuff?
There are so many people into it.
It's such a business now.
Yeah, but everybody pays so much attention to these things.
Well, people, you know, everyone gives lip service to the notion that negative campaigning is bad, but as I understand it, it's also effective.
that the victim is diminished.
Or even destroyed.
Or destroyed, which seems to be the goal.
And I have to say, it depresses me, being as one who's been a journalist for many, many years, to see this PAC mentality of people who it's almost reflexive to go after stories.
Without any thought of what the hell it's all about, Joe.
Yeah.
I think that's another part of it, though, Nick.
I'm talking right now about what we do to each other.
Uh-huh.
Exactly.
And, you know, I think what you're saying definitely should be a matter of concern.
I mean, you actually point out what you call a criminal class of journalists later on in the book.
Yeah, well, there is such a thing.
people who really will go on a campaign of vilification to destroy a person just by a constantly repeated lie that they will know is not true.
And I think they're, of course, a minority.
And there was a time in this country when you had to check on such people, the libel law, and it's gone.
And so that
These people almost drive the competition among the journalists and the electronic people.
And they really should be brought up short every now and then.
Thomas Jefferson, who really believed in free speech, loved the law of libel.
He said, this is better than having any check by government.
Let whoever has the inclination to do so, you know, step forward.
He said this in his second inaugural.
And he, step forward and take him to task.
And it should only be a law of libel.
It's a limited, only when there's real defamation.
If you call someone fat, or stupid, or lazy, or whatever, or short, me, then that's not defamatory.
There's a piece in the New York Times this morning about a care libel case that was thrown out against John McPhee, and I guess it was, he did a piece where he quoted somebody else saying that this guy had participated in some murders, I mean, and the guy lives in the United States, and he sued for libel, and he lost, you know.
Sure.
He said because they were accurately quoting other people.
Yeah.
All you have to do is find someone to say it.
If a person does it, oh, and deliberately, and there are columnists, sad to say, who do it, and there is a market for it, then there should be a concern of people.
There was a time when, around the turn of the century, when the courts would actually say, if you allow people to say just anything,
then no one is going to step forward to run for public office.
I could show you the cases, but they're there, and the judge has expressed concern about that.
There should be an ability to sue and libel.
By the way, it should not be...
You know, it has to be false and it has to be defamatory.
And generally malice seems to be a criterion as well, I think.
But malice, as they use it, I don't want to get too technical about this.
We're just chatting here.
I don't see this getting into my piece, but I am interested in your thoughts.
But go ahead.
The malice thing is the thing which has wiped out the law of libel because the court in the Sullivan case in 1964, Justice Brennan said that...
You have to show malice.
And malice is not just meanness and hatred.
It has a whole new definition.
It's also knowledge that what you're reporting is incorrect.
That's it.
And there is the knowledge that it's incorrect.
Are you pretty sure it's incorrect?
And you go ahead with it anyway.
You go ahead with it anyway.
But the guy against whom you've used it has to now show your state of mind.
That's right.
And show that you proceeded with reckless disregard, as they say.
Go ahead.
I'm sorry.
And herein lies the...
the end of the law of libel for a public person.
Of course, the definition of what makes a person public enters.
And that's been broadened beyond
I mean, you have to be a Trappist monk.
Yeah, well, if you're involved in a lawsuit, for instance, or if you've been involved in, you know, any kind of charity work or something like that.
If you write letters to the editor, you become a public person.
So a public person is almost everyone.
And the bad thing is that legitimate journalists bridle at the notion that a law of libel would be a threat to them.
It really would not.
It would really be just to those who...
It's something like the law.
You have a law against murder.
There are very few of us that would be inclined to murder someone.
You have to have it for those who just might.
And it's only a small class.
And am I on the tape now?
Yep.
Okay.
If you want me to go off, just tell me.
Let me just go off it for a second.
They're taping again.
First of all, let's talk in general about your view of what a memoir is as opposed to an autobiography.
I think a memoir is a little easier.
Because it can be very selective, of course.
It can be very selective.
You're not trying to give a day-by-day story of a life.
It allows you to lean more on memory.
Well, that was my sense of it.
That's how I felt about it at the time, as best I can recollect.
And some say, well, there's a sharpness.
There's a bite to what you've said about.
I've heard that, and I think that's true.
I don't think it's anything, however, that has not been said.
Most of the disputes I speak of in the book are kind of a public thing.
And I don't think that, and I commend you also, it's my sense, maybe others will feel differently, but I don't think that you're using this as an opportunity to settle scores.
No, no, you know, I really felt as though I, you know, this obligation to truth required me to, you know, state it as,
as honestly as humanly possible, and that does involve your very subjective kind of recollection of things.
I can't think of an example, but here's a quick one.
Bob Crane is an old friend.
Somewhere in the book, Bob Crane is saying to me, why won't you tell me you think I'm a leek?
I said, dear God, I think you're not a leek, you're Niagara Falls.
Because Bob couldn't help himself.
He would tell everything.
No malice in Bob.
Total just irresponsibility.
And so that, by one of my political critics, turned out to be that I had characterized Crane in the book as...
Unreliable is the word.
I don't think that's the word you use, is it?
Not at all.
And I think that the fact that I'm saying it, my suggestion is that you can only understand it in its context.
That's right.
And I'm saying it to Crane.
And when Crane read it,
He himself liked it.
He thought it was good.
He said, I am.
I'm away.
I can help myself.
But, I mean, there certainly could be opportunities to, I mean, without doubt, I mean, a politician, it's endemic to the species.
I mean, there are enemies that are created along the way.
I mean, you acknowledge that and, you know, the opportunity to have a
a book appear between hardcovers, you know, is a sense of permanence.
And it does give an opportunity for, if not the last word, but a word that will endure a lot longer than something said on a radio call-in program, to be sure.
And yet you did kind of hold back here a bit.
There are some people, almost in every case I try to put in
the fact that the person had his own virtues.
I did give the business to Raymond Flynn in some way, but I did say he was, this is not my word, but I like the word, indefatigable.
Worker, you know, he just kept at it all the time.
He had many such qualities.
I'm sorry, go ahead.
But your original question, you know who talked about the difference between a monobiography and a memoir not long ago was Gore Vidal in the book review in the Times on Sunday.
recently spoke of the difference oh yeah oh i've it's it's a matter of continuing interest to me and i and i it's not it's not the first time i've asked the question i just i like to hear what the what the writer has to say about it and i have to say that you dictated this some of it i dictated some of it i wrote out longhand yeah no it's very very nicely written there are some
You know, I take it from one who reads books professionally.
This is my business.
You have a nice facility with the written word here.
Congratulations.
And I kept looking for who the consultant was.
And you say at the back, there isn't any.
This is my own.
And for better or for worse, you know, I admire that.
I really want to see the real thing as opposed to some highly paid ghostwriter, you know, in the suburbs.
Actually, I began to enjoy it.
And I did have a sense that I was having my say.
Again, one of my critics in the Globe said, Paul just seeks to have the last word.
Well, for heaven's sake...
I know the press has the last word.
I'm just trying to have a word.
Have they reviewed it already?
No, they have not.
Some of the sportswriters have strafed and bombed it.
Not sportswriters, but I'm sorry.
I was going to say the sportswriters have covered it.
No, you say early on, and of course, and I'm not going to make any deal out of it, but you do get into your brother, and you do give three pages to it, and...
But you do say that many of the attacks are, you believe, attacks against you, are meant to be attacks against you.
Yeah, I think sometimes that was the case.
I think that, well, way back in 1990, I was seeking re-election, but I was also associated with the campaign of John Silber.
And I think some of the attacks on him were aimed at me.
In fact, it crept into the campaign so that some of the statewide offices... Keep in mind, I was about the last Democrat still standing, so it was a very juicy target.
Everyone was leaving Dukakis, Evelyn Murphy, even Crane, Kavarian.
And so it was sort of the most...
prominent, statewide, democratic, individual in the mix.
And so I became an easy target.
And oftentimes, I think some very false things about my brother were uttered.
And then I would be mentioned.
No nexus.
The sort of
mentioned well but the brother of the context would be the brother of and even Bill Weld with whom I got along very well during my five years he called me for me at one point to step down and he didn't give any real reason for it I told him then I'll step down I said when you're here I'm going to step down on you I admire your you know your loyalty I mean you say this is my brother and and and
He's lived his life and I've lived mine, but he's my brother and I love him, I guess.
What more can you say?
And, of course, it's a credit to your constituency, isn't it, that whatever problems he may have had, they haven't held it against you, have they?
It's an amazing thing there.
I never hear from them.
They don't say anything about it to me.
They might say, how is he doing?
They know him.
Most of them know him as Jimmy to the outside world.
He has a nickname.
The press carries the nickname always.
But the people I know who know him use a different name.
And if anything, they'll just say hello to Jim or something.
And then each time a new kind of reporter would come along, I can remember there was one, Jack Cole.
He'd never let me near an interview or anything, if he is, that he wouldn't want to get into that.
I'd just say I'm not discussing.
But what would there be to say in any case?
There wasn't much to say, but he just thought that was a juicy... Good soundbite, I guess.
Exactly.
So as I sort of said, no, I'm not discussing.
Didn't he run for public office?
He did, yeah.
And he got trounced, right?
And so did Chris Leighton run for public office.
Journalists actually believe that they're doers.
Here I go.
You're lumping them all together.
Are there any Bulger's rules of politics?
I mean... Bulger's rules?
Yeah.
No, I think a couple of things I would say to people is... I think I'd say somehow or other make up your own mind and think for yourself.
And if you come to a strong conclusion...
on a particular matter of importance, don't be afraid to stay with it.
You might provide leadership for others.
People, I really believe in the maxim of Edmund Burke, you know, the famous one where he says, your representative owes you not his industry only, but his judgment.
And he betrays instead of serving you.
when he sacrifices it to your opinion.
It's wonderful.
And I have that by heart only because I say it to new legislators.
I say, sir, if you have a strong conviction, don't just remain unshakable and let somebody appeal to reason to dissuade you.
And you'll find that people really, really respect that.
I probably, at some levels, and I'm a Democrat, so...
Allow me to just say this, that some of my favorites are suffering these days, I think, by virtue of the fact that they're viewed as weather vanes.
Democrats, you mean?
Yeah.
The notion that whatever the heck, the prevailing wind is in that direction.
And I've always found that my own constituents, even in disagreement...
You know, I really don't sense defiance in this book, but there is one lovely quote towards the back where you mention particularly this criminal element, which you describe as a discrete criminal class of reporter.
And for everything that's been thrown at you, you say, I am still here.
Yeah, yeah.
I love that line.
Is politics a contact sport?
Maybe we could talk specifically about Massachusetts politics.
And also I want to get into it.
By the way, tell me when we're running...
when you have to run.
Oh, I'm trying.
Okay, good.
You mentioned, of course, the South, and I'm not asking you things that are in the book because my job is to read it and to pull it out of there and stuff that I've already read, but you do say at one point that South Boston has been maligned nationally by headlines and stuff, and I wonder if you could just expand a little bit on that.
The busing edict was a gross...
era and it inflicted injustice upon the people of that community and then the injustice was compounded when on each occasion when they protested they were smeared nationally and internationally as bigots for doing so now
I had Dr. James Coleman one time as a guest of mine.
He says, you know, the sociologist who died only recently, but who had been sort of the father of this busing thing.
By this time, he had sort of recanted, but it was too late.
It now had a life of its own.
No one was going to end it.
And he said to me what I think is true.
He said, your people,
are the innocent third party.
You have the aggrieved black parent who's saying, for heaven's sake, don't assign me on the basis of skin color.
And you have the wrongdoing officialdom, whatever it might be, the bureaucracy or the school committee or whoever.
And then they have swept into this innocent third party.
They've done nothing wrong.
No one even accuses them of having done anything wrong.
And yet,
They're called upon by a federal judge to pay the penalty to have their children shipped about on the basis of skin color, the very thing that we decried elsewhere in the country only a short time before.
And they're also going to see these institutions, local institutions, schools, dismantled, closed, many of them.
And no community can survive without these various local institutions.
They were part and parcel of the place.
The thing that should have been done, of course, was to just make sure the black children could go wherever they wanted to go.
And then respect the same wish on the part of the white parent.
And in that way, you'd have people, they would not be confronting each other and battling it out.
But the unaffected proponents didn't see it that way.
They just saw these people...
in the city as bad people.
Michael Novak says that these are the urban Catholic ethnics who are badly maligned.
But he said, consider, there is no racially mixed city unless they're remaining because they have this kind of a community rootedness, do you know?
And he admired that, Novak, and he thought that that was very important.
Yet I think by, on the part of many, many others, it was not appreciated.
We've become so sophisticated.
We could never think of having a home or town.
Well, but it is a perception that people have.
There was a book that was published...
Oh, two or three years ago, and I wrote a scathing review of it, and it was about the Boston Celtics by two New York Times reporters.
And in there, they quote, without checking their facts, Spike Lee.
And he says, whenever I think of Boston, he says, all I see are those school buses with the kids being tipped over.
Oh, my goodness.
And, you know, rocked and tipped over.
And I said to myself, that never happened.
What the heck is he talking about there?
And these reporters printed that without checking their facts.
And it never did happen, you know.
But yet that's the perception.
And they quoted it.
They said, well, he said it.
Again, it's he said it.
But, you know, the normal reporter would go check your facts and see if such a thing ever happened.
But there never was any kind of an incident like that.
And yet it's put out on a national basis.
publication like that.
I mean, you know, before that, school buses with black children were coming into every school in the community, with the exception of South Boston High, which was so crowded with the locals that they actually had an annex down at the L Street bathhouse.
So the problem came from the judge being so high-handed and from his
distant comfort in Wellesley, where I understand he was quite lionized for his heroism.
He said, no, we'll do this.
We'll uproot several hundred here, several hundred there, and we'll ship them around.
Tom Sowell, you know, the black economist, I think he is, writer, he said that
Those who move other people's children around like pieces on a chessboard demonstrate their profound contempt for those people.
So I, who identify with these folks who are being moved around, I can tell you, you felt their contempt.
You felt it.
You wouldn't sit still for this.
There's not one.
I used to challenge each one.
I think I say all of this.
I say, what you must do is...
tell your congregation to put their children at the disposal of the judge.
I said, you should have to do things at home.
It's not what you tell us to do.
It's what you do yourself.
And if you have children yourself, for heaven's sake, put them at the disposal of the judge.
And there were no takers.
The hypocrisy of it.
And the cynicism of it all was that
You could do this to poor people.
You could never do it in the affluence of Wellesley or Lincoln because those people have checkbooks.
They would not sit still for having their children and their education being disturbed in this way.
And most of them were probably sending their kids to private schools in any case.
Oh, sure.
I never met a...